---
tags: KERI
email: charles@jolocom.io
---

# Next Key Configuration Commitment

The KERI pre-rotation scheme is designed to:
* Commit to the next key set in advance, to prevent malicious rotation
* Enforce rotation-on-first-use, such that the controlling key set is always kept as secure as possible
* Conceal the next key set, to mitigate potential risks from broken public key cryptography schemes or quantum computing attacks
* Conceal the keys used to assemble the commitment while they're being collected

## Key Configuration Structure

The Key Configuration used to generate `nxt` consists of two elements:
* The Signature Threshold, or `sith`: integer or set of integers describing how many signatures are required from keys in the set, for Events to be considered properly signed, serialized as a plain hex string.
* The Keys (`keys`): the set of Public Keys used to verify the signatures on Events, serialized in fully-qualified prefix form.

In order to commit to the configuration, each of the elements must be combined in a cryptographic digest. The process for this is as follows:
1. Choose a method `D` from the set of self-addressing derivation methods
2. Encode the `sith` as a hex string (lower-case)
3. Encode all `keys` in their serialized prefix form
4. Get `sith_d` from `D(sith)`
5. For each `key_n` in `keys`, get `key_n_d` from `D(key_n)` to create the set of digests `digests`
6. For `sith_d` and each element `d` in `digests`, get the raw bytes of the digest (without the derivation code) and XOR them all together to make `xor_raw`
7. Serialize `xor_raw` to base64 URL safe form without padding and prepend the derivation code of `D`

In contrast to a simple concatenate-and-digest approach, the XOR method has two advantages:
* Public Keys to create the config can be passed around agents over a network to create the `nxt` commitment without being intercepted, as they can be hashed and concealed prior to transmission.
* The order of processing of the elements does not need to be consistent as XOR is commutative, unlike concatenation.

## Python Example
The following example shows the nxt creation process in Python:.
``` python
sith = 2
keys = ['BrHLayDN-mXKv62DAjFLX1_Y5yEUe0vA9YPe_ihiKYHE',
        'BujP_71bmWFVcvFmkE9uS8BTZ54GIstZ20nj_UloF8Rk',
        'B8T4xkb8En6o0Uo5ZImco1_08gT5zcYnXzizUPVNzicw']
            
# convert sith to hex string no leading zeros
sith = '2'

# Blake3_256 sith digest, fully qualified prefix form
sithdig = 'EgT6bcpFB5_OFr6Ci0N8-bDeJ5Cf_5K7vVmpWW8jy_j0'

# raw binary unqualified in string escaped form
sithdig == b"\x81>\x9br\x91A\xe7\xf3\x85\xaf\xa0\xa2\xd0\xdf>l7\x89\xe4'\xff\xe4\xae\xefVjV[\xc8\xf2\xfe="

# convert keys to digests
# fully qualified Base64 digests
keydigs == ['EmB26yMzroICh-opKNdkYyP000kwevU18WQI95JaJDjY',
         'EO4CXp8gs0yJg1fFhJLs5hH6neqJwhFEY7vrJEdPe87I',
         'ELWWZEyBpjrfM1UU0n31KIyIXllrCoLEOI5UHD9x7WxI']
         
# raw binary (unqualifed) digests in string escaped form
keydigs =[b'\x98\x1d\xba\xc8\xcc\xeb\xa0\x80\xa1\xfa\x8aJ5\xd9\x18\xc8\xfd4\xd2L\x1e\xbdM|Y\x02=\xe4\x96\x89\x0e6',
                       b';\x80\x97\xa7\xc8,\xd3"`\xd5\xf1a$\xbb9\x84~\xa7z\xa2p\x84Q\x18\xee\xfa\xc9\x11\xd3\xde\xf3\xb2',
                       b'-e\x99\x13 i\x8e\xb7\xcc\xd5E4\x9f}J#"\x17\x96Z\xc2\xa0\xb1\x0e#\x95\x07\x0f\xdc{[\x12']

# now combine with XOR the raw versions of all four digests, sith plus three keys. In python must first convert to integers in order to use XOR = ^

raw = sithdig ^ keydig[0] ^ keydig[1] ^ keydig[2]

# now convert raw to fully qualified with derivation code for the digest algorithm
# in this case Blake3_256

nxt = 'E' + base64(raw)

assert nxt = 'ED8YvDrXvGuaIVZ69XsBVA5YN2pNTfQOFwgeloVHeWKs'


```

The motivation for this new revised method is to enable multiple signature controlled prefixes where the controllers of each public key are distributed. In this case, in order to create the nxt committment the public keys would otherwise have to be transmitted outside of the key creation infrastructure. This would expose them to a post-quantum attack on the public keys themselves. With the new method only the digest of the public key need be transmitted outside the key creation infrastructure from each of the controllers. The digest of the public key is post quantum proof and therefore is not vulnerable to a post quantum attack.
