---
tags: KERI
email: sam@samuelsmith.org
---

# KID0002




### KERI Derivation Codes vs. Multi-Codec

One of the important design constraints for KERI is performance in data streaming applications. Multi-codec is meant to be universally general. Such as function code byte(s), base code byte(s,) hash size byte(s). The average case for KERI is better by design. Performance optimization comes at the loss of generality. A generally compliant implementation of Multi-codec is more verbose on average than KERI codes.  

KERI supports two formats for fully qualified cryptographic material. These are Base64 on 6 bit boundaries per character and Base2 on 8 bit boundaries per byte. Base64 is the most compact URL/File/Textual format. Base 2 with 8 bit boundaries is the most generally useful binary format. The coding is designed so that a base 2 stream with 8 bit boundaries and a base 64 stream with 6 bit boundaries have perfect boundaries for both. The number of Base 64-6bit characters is 4/3 of the number of base2-8bit bytes. Likewise the number base 2-8bit bytes is 3/4 the number of Base 64-6bit characters.  

The base 64 standard adds pad characters to ensure these perfect boundaries. KERI uses these base64 pad characters opportunistically. In most cases, this means, zero overhead for its derivation code. Its worst case (for now) is 3 additional bytes (4 base 64 characters) for a derivation code when there are no pad characters on the base material. This case is comparable to a Multi-Codec with function, base, and length bytes. Also there is no assurance of perfect boundaries with multi-codec between Base64-6bit and Base2-8bit for a given base material length, which means that pad characters may be needed in addition to the MultiCodec characters. This further increases the average length for multi-codec over KERI.  

Furthermore, anything that has perfect boundaries with divisor of 3 base2-8 bit and 4 base64-6 bit may also have perfect boundaries for both. This includes Hex (4 bit boundaries) and octal (3 bit boundaries). For example, 24 bits = 3x8bits = 4x6bits = 6X4bits =8X3bits. So KERI derivation codes satisfy the major binary representations.  Perfect boundaries means conversion from characters streams to binary streams is optimized for transmission and processing. Eventually, as KERI becomes widely used, it is anticipated that full binary implementations of KERI will result.  These binary representations will benefit from the ability to leverage crypto-graphic material streams (character or byte) that always align on perfect boundaries which should result in significant performance optimizations.
