---
tags: KERI
email: sam@samuelsmith.org
---

# KID0003  Event and Extracted Data Set Serialization 

There are two serialization algorithms needed for KERI. The first is the serialization of full events.  The second is the serialization of data sets extracted from a full event. 

In KERI, complete key events need to be serialized in order to create cryptographic signatures of each event. Complete events also need to be serialized in order to create cryptographic digests of each event. Complete events are propagated over the network in signed serialized form. Complete events also need to be de-serialized after network propagation such that the resultant de-serialization preserves the semantic structure of the data elements in the event. Because the cryptographic material in the events may be of variable length, a fixed field length serialization is not a viable approach. Consequently KERI must support variable length field serialization. Moreover serialization encodings that support arbitrary nested self-describing data structures provide future proofing to event composition. Notably, JSON, CBOR, and MsgPack are well known broadly supported serialization encodings that support arbitrary nested self-describing data structures. JSON is an ASCII text encoding that is human readable, albeit somewhat verbose, that is commonly used in web applications. On the other hand both CBOR and MsgPack are binary encodings that are much more compact. Supporting all three encodings (and possibly others) would satisfy a wide range of application, transport, and resource constaints. Importantly, because only the controller of the associated identifier prefix may compose KERI events, the ordering of elements in the event serialization may be determined solely by that controller. Other entities may sign the event serialization provided by the controller but do not need to provide a serialization of their own.

Within the KERI protocol cryptographic digests and signatures are created of specified subsets of the data elements extracted from complete KERI key events. Consequently these extracted data sets also need to be serialized. Importantly, however, the extracted data set serialization do not need to be propagated over the network. This means that the serializations do not need to preserve the semantic structure of the data. This allows extracted data serialization encoding to simplified. These digests of extracted data, however, need to be reproducible by any other entity. This means that the ordering of the data elements in the serialization must be exactly specified. 

In summary, the necessary constraint for complete event serialization is support for arbitrary data structures with variable length fields that are serializable and de-serializable in multiple formats. Reproducible ordering is not a necessary constraint. The necessary constraint for extracted data element sets is reproducible ordering but there is no need to de-serialize.

Beneficial if not necessary constraints are ease and convenience of development and maintenance of the associated code libraries. One possibility that was considered and rejected would be to use same serializations for both the complete event serialization and the extracted data set serialization. The problem with that approach is that on an event by event basis the serialization encoding may change, that is, one event may be encoded using JSON and another using CBOR. This would require keeping track of which encoding was used on the event in order to reproducibly perform an extracted data serialization. More problematic is that for delegated events, the extracted data set digest included in one event may be from data extracted from an event belonging to a different identifier. In such a situation, keeping track of the encoding provides an inconvenience that obviates the advantages of using the same encodings for both events and extracted data sets. Given this, then a simplified but repeatable encoding algorithm may be used for the extracted data set serializations. Simplified because the extracted data sets do not need to be de-serialized.

The one constraint for extracted data set serializations is that the ordering of elements be exactly specified. One way to simplify that specification is to use the ordering of data elements in the complete event serialization. But this means imposing an ordering constraint on the complete event serialization. The advantage is that ordering is only expressed once per event not once per extracted data set. This better future proofs the protocol as there is always only one place for ordering and that is the complete event element ordering.

Another benefit of ordering the complete event serialization is that automated self-contained discovery of the serialization encoding used in an event becomes trivialized by requiring that the first element in the serialization be the version string element. A de-serializer may then unambiguously determine the encoding by inspecting the first few bytes of any serialized event. This better supports a wider variety of transport protocols and databases.

Until recently native JSON serialization libraries in JavaScript did not preserve a logical ordering of elements from a Mapping (JavaScript Object) data structure. The only ordering possible was lexicographic by sorting the fields in the mapping by their labels. This meant that arbitrary logical ordering of mapping fields was not possible and no semantic meaning could be imposed on the serialization based on order of appearance of fields. One could approximate some ordering by imposing lexicographic constraints on the field names but that makes the field names less usable. Ordered mappings support a logical ordering by preserving the order of creation of fields in the mapping. Any arbitrary order may be imposed by changing the order of creation of the fields in the mapping.

Fortunately Javascript ES6 (ES2015) and later now provide a mechanism to impose property (field) creation order on JSON.stringify() serializations. The latest versions of Javascript now natively preserve property creation order when serializing. This means that de-serialization will automatically recreate the properties in the same order as serialized. For those implementations of Javascript ES6 or later that do not yet support native JSON.stringify property creation ordering, a JSON.stringify parameter replacer function that uses the [[ownPropertyKeys]] internal method, namely, Reflect.ownKeys(object) may be employed to ensure property creation order. This means that native Javascript support may be easily and broadly provided. All major JavaScript implementations now support JavaScript ES6. Example JavaScript code is provided later in this document.

Other languages like Python, Ruby, Rust etc. have long supported native creation order preserving serializations of ordered mappings. These preserve field element (property equivalent) creation order. This in combination with the recent JavaScript support means that KERI may impose an ordering constraint on complete event data elements that may be used for canonical ordering of both complete events and extracted data element sets.

## Event Serialization Algorthm

The ordering of elements in each mapping in each event element is specified (see below). This includes nested elements. Serialization using the standard JSON, CBOR, and MsgPack libraries follow a recursive depth first traversal of nested elements.

Complete events are serialized/de-serialized from/to ordered mappings using the JSON, CBOR or MsgPack functions for serializing/deserializing.  Each programming language may name the functions differently for serialization/de-serialization. In JavaScript they are JSON.stringify/JSON.parse. In Python they are json.dumps/json.loads. Likewise the CBOR and MsgPack libraries in each language may use different names for these functions.

The JSON serialization is without white space.

## Extracted Data Set Serializaton

The extracted data set serialization algorithm serializes the elements in each set using the same order of appearance as the associated event. Nested elements are serialized using a depth first traversal.

The serialization appends (concatenates) the serialized value of each element as it encounters it. Each element value is serialized as a UTF-8 encoded string of characters. 

Each implementation must perform the recursive depth first traversal.

## Event Ordered Element Sets

As of this writing KERI has 5 different types of key events, these are:

Inception Event
Rotation Event
Interaction Event
Delegated Inception Event
Delegated Rotation Event

Each event may have slightly different sets of elements. The events are expressed as an ordered mapping of (label, value) pairs. The values may include lists (arrays) of values or (label, value) pairs or nested ordered mappings of (label, value) pairs.

An Interaction event in a delegated key event stream has the identical element set of an interaction event in a non-delegated key event stream. As a result there ordering from the non-delegated interaction event may be applied to the delegated interaction event. 

In the following specifications the element sets are expressed in JSON format. Both MsgPack and CBOR natively support JSON compatible field element values for the various data types as well as ascii field element labels. As a result a JSON constrained representation is sufficient to ensure interoperabilty.

### Element Labels

vs = version string (all)
id = identifier prefix (all)
sn = sequence number (all)
ilk = event ilk type (all)
dig = digest previous event (rot, itx, drt)
sith = signing threshold or list of weighted thresholds (icp, rot, dip, drt)
keys = list of signing public keys (icp, rot, dip, drt)
next = next digest of ensuing threshold and signers (icp, rot, dip, drt)
toad = witness threshold of accountable duplicity tally (icp, rot, dip, drt)
wits = witness list of id prefixes (icp, dip)
cuts = witness cut prune list (rot, drt)
adds = witness add graft list (rot, drt)
data = config data list (icp) or data seal list (rot, itx)
perm = list of ordered mappings of delegation permissions (dip, drt)
seal = delegation seal (dip, drt)
sigs = signature offset list (all)

### Version String

Version string enables discovery of encoding when parsing serialized
packet.


Parts:
    KERI_encoding_size_version
    KERI = KERI event packet identifier
    encoding = one of cbor, json, mgpk
    size = 4 character hex string length of serialized event 
           max size 65535 bytes in version 1.0
    version = major.minor = 1.0


version tuple = (1, 0) = (major, minor)

major increments with backward breaking changes
minor increments with backward compatible changes

Serialize event with 0000 size value in version string.

```
KERI_cbor_0000_1.0
KERI_json_0000_1.0
KERI_mgpk_0000_1.0
```

Then replace the 0000 size field inside the version string  of the serialized event with lowercase hex of actual size of serialized event.

```
KERI_cbor_00fe_1.0
KERI_json_01c2_1.0
KERI_mgpk_00fe_1.0
```

Then sign the encoded event that now has the correct size in its version string.


### Inception Event


```javascript
{
  "vs"   : "KERI_json_00fe_1.0",
  "id"   : "AaU6JR2nmwyZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
  "sn"   : "0",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "ilk"  : "icp",
  "sith" : "1",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "keys" : ["AaU6JR2nmwyZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM"],  // list of qual Base64
  "next" : "DZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvaU6JR2nmwyYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
  "toad" : "1",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "wits" : [],  // list of qualified Base64
  "data" : [],  // list of config ordered mappings
  "sigs" : ["0"]  // list of hex strings no leading zeros
}

```

### Rotation Event


```javascript
{
  "vs"   : "KERI_json_01c2_1.0",
  "id"   : "AaU6JR2nmwyZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
  "sn"   : "1",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "ilk"  : "rot",
  "dig"  : "DZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvaU6JR2nmwyYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
  "sith" : "1",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "keys" : ["AaU6JR2nmwyZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM"],  // list of qual Base64
  "next" : 'DZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvaU6JR2nmwyYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM',  // qualified Base64
  "toad" : "1",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "cuts" : [],  // list of qualified Base64
  "adds" : [],  // list of qualified Base64
  "data" : [],  // list of seal ordered mappings
  "sigs" : ["0"]  // list of hex strings no leading zeros
}

```

### Interaction Event

```javascript
{
  "vs"   : "KERI_json_00df_1.0",
  "id"   : "AaU6JR2nmwyZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
  "sn"   : "1",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "ilk"  : "ixn",
  "dig"  : "DZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvaU6JR2nmwyYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
  "data" : [],  // list of seal ordered mappings
  "sigs" : ["0"]  // list of hex strings no leading zeros
}

```

### Delegated Inception Event

```javascript
{
  "vs"   : "KERI_json_01f4_1.0",
  "id"   : "AaU6JR2nmwyZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
  "sn"   : "0",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "ilk"  : "dip",
  "sith" : "1",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "keys" : ["AaU6JR2nmwyZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM"],  // list of qual Base64
  "next" : "DZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvaU6JR2nmwyYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
  "toad" : "1",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "wits" : [],  // list of qualified Base64
  "perm" : [],   // list of ordered mappings of delegation permissions
  "seal" : 
           {
             "id"  : "AmwyZ-i0d8JZaU6JR2nAoTNZH3ULvYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qual Base64
             "sn"  : "4",  // hex string no leading zeros
             "dig" : "DZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvaU6JR2nmwyYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qual Base64
           },  
  "sigs" : ["0"]  // list of hex strings no leading zeros
}

```

### Delegated Rotation Event


```javascript
{
  "vs"   : "KERI_json_02fe_1.0",
  "id"   : "AaU6JR2nmwyZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
  "sn"   : "1",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "ilk"  : "drt",
  "dig"  : "DZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvaU6JR2nmwyYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
  "sith" : "1",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "keys" : ["AaU6JR2nmwyZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM"],  // list of qual Base64
  "next" : "DZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvaU6JR2nmwyYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
  "toad" : "1",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "cuts" : [],  // list of qualified Base64
  "adds" : [],  // list of qualified Base64
  "perm" : [],   // list of ordered mappings of delegation permissions
  "seal" : 
           {
             "id"  : "AmwyZ-i0d8JZaU6JR2nAoTNZH3ULvYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qual Base64
             "sn"  : "4",  // hex string no leading zeros
             "dig" : 'DZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvaU6JR2nmwyYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM',  // qual Base64
           },  
  "sigs" : ["0"]  // list of hex strings no leading zeros
}

```


## Ordered Extracted Data Element Sets


### Prefix Derivation Data from Inception Event

```javascript
[
  "vs",
  "sith",
  "keys",
  "next",
  "toad",
  "wits",
  "data"
]

```



### Inception Delegation Data

```javascript
[
  "vs",    // delegated
  "id",    // delegated
  "sn",    // delegated
  "ilk",   // delegated
  "sith",  // delegated
  "keys",  // delegated
  "next",  // delegated
  "toad",  // delegated
  "wits",  // delegated
  "perm",  // delegated
]

```

### Rotation Delegation Data

```javascript
[
  "vs",    // delegated event
  "id",    // delegated event
  "sn",    // delegated event
  "ilk",   // delegated event
  "dig",   // delegated event prev event
  "sith",  // delegated event
  "keys",  // delegated event
  "next",  // delegated event
  "toad",  // delegated event
  "cuts",  // delegated event
  "adds",  // delegated event
  "perm",  // delegated event
]

```

### Delegated Prefix Derivation Data from Events

```javascript
[
  "vs",    // delegating event vs
  "id",    // delegating event id
  "sn",    // delegating event sn
  "ilk",   // delegating event ilk
  "dig",   // delegating event dig (of previous event)
  "vs",    // delegated event
  "sith",  // delegated event
  "keys",  // delegated event
  "next",  // delegated event
  "toad",  // delegated event
  "wits",  // delegated event
  "perm",  // delegated event
]

```

### Next Signing Config Digest for Future Event

```javascript
[
  "sith",  
  "keys",  
]

```


### Delegation Seal from Event Seal Mapping

Fields

```javascript
[
  "id",  
  "sn",  
  "dig"
]
```

Event Seal Mapping

```javascript
{
  "id"   : "AaU6JR2nmwyZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
  "sn"   : "1",  // hex string no leading zeros
  "dig"  : "DZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvaU6JR2nmwyYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
}
```

### Digest Seal from Digest Seal Mapping

Fields

```javascript
[ 
  "dig"
]
```

Digest Seal Mapping

```javascript
{
  "dig"  : "DZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvaU6JR2nmwyYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
}
```

### Hash Tree Root Seal from Root Seal Mapping

Fields

```javascript
[ 
  "root"
]
```

Digest Seal Mapping

```javascript
{
  "root"  : "DZ-i0d8JZAoTNZH3ULvaU6JR2nmwyYAfSVPzhzS6b5CM",  // qualified Base64
}
```



## JavaScript Ordered Object Property Serialization

The following code snippet shows how to enforce object property creation order preserving serialization using JSON.stringify for ES6 and later.

### Code Snippet

```javascript
"use strict"

// Spec http://www.ecma-international.org/ecma-262/6.0/#sec-json.stringify
const replacer = (key, value) =>
  value instanceof Object && !(value instanceof Array) ? 
    Reflect.ownKeys(value)
    .reduce((ordered, key) => {
      ordered[key] = value[key];
      return ordered 
    }, {}) :
    value;

// Usage

// JSON.stringify({c: 1, a: { d: 0, c: 1, e: {a: 0, 1: 4}}}, replacer);


var main = function() 
{
    console.log("Running Main.");
    
    let x = { zip: 3, apple: 1, bulk: 2, _dog: 4 };
    let y = JSON.stringify(x);
    console.log(y);
    console.log(Object.keys(x));
    console.log(Object.getOwnPropertyNames(x));
    console.log(Reflect.ownKeys(x));
    console.log(replacer);
    let w  = {w: 1, a: x, c: {e: 2, b: 3}};
    let z = JSON.stringify(x, replacer);
    console.log(z);
    let v = JSON.stringify(w, replacer);
    console.log(v);
    
}

if (require.main === module) 
{
    main();
}


//nodejs % node play.js
//Running Main.
//{"zip":3,"apple":1,"bulk":2,"_dog":4}
//[ 'zip', 'apple', 'bulk', '_dog' ]
//[ 'zip', 'apple', 'bulk', '_dog' ]
//[ 'zip', 'apple', 'bulk', '_dog' ]
//[Function: replacer]
//{"zip":3,"apple":1,"bulk":2,"_dog":4}
//{"w":1,"a":{"zip":3,"apple":1,"bulk":2,"_dog":4},"c":{"e":2,"b":3}}

```

### Background

We may impose ordered serialization with the JSON.stringify method  by using the replacer  option and the [[ownPropertyKeys]] internal method added in Javascript ES6 exposed as Reflect.ownKeys().  This method is provided in JavaScript ES6 (2015). [[ownPropertyKeys]] uses the property creation order.  At the time of ES6, JSON.stringify was not required to use the [[ownPropertyKeys]] iteration order (ie property creation order). This appears to have been fixed in later versions of ES. (See the discussion below). As of this writing nodejs v14.2.0 and the latest versions of Chrome, Safari, and Firefox all appear to preserve property creation order  in JSON.stringify(). This means that we can depend on and use that ordering in the specification.  For earlier versions that support ES6 then a custom replacer function for JSON.stringify(x, replacer) will ensure that property creation order is used.

https://stackoverflow.com/questions/30076219/does-es6-introduce-a-well-defined-order-of-enumeration-for-object-properties/30919039

In ES6 the stringify order does not follow the ownPropertyKeys (property creation order) ordering
but this will be fixed in ES 2020. ES11.  Looks like Babel supports ES2020 already.

https://www.keithcirkel.co.uk/metaprogramming-in-es6-part-2-reflect/

Reflect.ownKeys ( target )

This has already been discussed a tiny bit in this article, you see Reflect.ownKeys implements [[OwnPropertyKeys]] which if you recall above is a combination of Object.getOwnPropertyNames and Object.getOwnPropertySymbols. This makes Reflect.ownKeys uniquely useful. Lets see shall we:

```javascript


var myObject = {
  foo: 1,
  bar: 2,
  [Symbol.for('baz')]: 3,
  [Symbol.for('bing')]: 4,
};

assert.deepEqual(Object.getOwnPropertyNames(myObject), ['foo', 'bar']);
assert.deepEqual(Object.getOwnPropertySymbols(myObject), [Symbol.for('baz'), Symbol.for('bing')]);

// Without Reflect.ownKeys:
var keys = Object.getOwnPropertyNames(myObject).concat(Object.getOwnPropertySymbols(myObject));
assert.deepEqual(keys, ['foo', 'bar', Symbol.for('baz'), Symbol.for('bing')]);

// With Reflect.ownKeys:
assert.deepEqual(Reflect.ownKeys(myObject), ['foo', 'bar', Symbol.for('baz'), Symbol.for('bing')]);


```



https://github.com/tc39/proposal-for-in-order

https://tc39.es/ecma262/#sec-ordinaryownpropertykeys

https://2ality.com/2015/10/property-traversal-order-es6.html#traversing-the-own-keys-of-an-object

https://www.stefanjudis.com/today-i-learned/property-order-is-predictable-in-javascript-objects-since-es2015/


https://medium.com/@robertgrosse/how-es6-classes-really-work-and-how-to-build-your-own-fd6085eb326a


